I recently read a book with very chill
title of if anyone builds it, everyone
dies. It's not just about artificial
intelligence. It's specifically about
super intelligence. There's a lot of
reasons why you might be worried about
AI. You might be worried about it
economically. You might be worried about
it when it comes to human meaning. You
might be worried, as I am, by what it
means for the process of apprenticeship.
How does anybody get good at something
if no one pays them to be not that good
at it? I had many years of being pretty
bad at stuff as a designer, as a
communicator, as a YouTuber. But I got
to be paid not very well to be pretty
bad at something, which makes sense.
That's how apprenticeship works. But why
would it ever happen if I can just type
make me a logo into a box? But that's
not what this is about. I have a lot of
near-term concerns about AI. But this
book by Elazarovski and Nate Sorz is
about the big worry. The worry that is
in some ways too big to even have or
it's so big that we assume that
everybody who has this worry is just
trying to get attention. like, "Yeah,
okay. I've heard the apocalypse is
coming, the apocalypse is always coming,
that's what people who want attention
say." The book makes a pretty good case
that if super intelligence is possible,
and we are on a path to achieving it,
then we got to be real careful about
that because systems that are
significantly better than humans at all
intelligence tasks could very likely uh
get over us and move on. Now, I think
that the sort of sci-fi element of the
book where they talk about one sketch of
how this might work, I think it's very
far-fetched. I don't think it would
work, but that isn't really the point.
They don't think they're predicting the
future. What the authors do do a very
good job of is making it very clear in
quite a short book that like these
things don't behave the way we tell them
to. And also, we've shown I think pretty
explicitly like a lack of caution as a
species here. And absolutely, we already
live in a world that is manipulated by
AI, mostly recommendation algorithms at
this point. They decide what we see. And
in many ways that contributes a a
significant amount to how we understand
our world. Now they probably aren't
doing that with much goal beyond profit.
But they also definitely aren't doing it
to like increase human thriving. Reading
this book was the first time I actually
spent some time thinking about the uh
practicalities of the like doom of the
really sort of AI super intelligence
apocalypse. And there were some things
that I felt like I disagreed with, some
things that I I definitely agreed with.
And but mostly what I had was just a lot
of thoughts that I wanted to keep
having. And the normal thing that
happens in that situation is you talk to
friends about it. You you think about it
in your your head. You stare at the
ceiling and you're like, "Oh my god."
But for me, sometimes I actually get to
do something really amazing, which is
actually talk to people who are
responsible for the books I read. And so
we're going to do that right now. It's
Nate Sores, uh, one of the authors of If
Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies. Quick
story. I live in a small town in
Montana. I don't call it a small town,
but other people would. and I went into
the shop to buy your book and I I
couldn't immediately find it. So I went
up to the desk and I said, "Hey, I'm
looking for a book. It's called If
Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies." And
the guy behind me who was just happened
to be walking by said, "Are you sure?"
And I was like, I mean, yeah, I got I
got to do it. I do a little bit. As an
author who has written books, I know
that the picking of the title is a is a
fraught moment. Was that the title from
the beginning? We didn't know what we
were going to title it and I think we
just used that phrase in one of the
chapters.
>> Sure.
>> Um and then we were like, "Oh, that's a
good phrase. That should be the title of
the chapter." And then a couple minutes
later we're like, "No, that should be
the title of the book."
>> It's a good one. I mean, it sounds like
a science fiction book, honest, which a
little bit occasionally it is.
>> It's in fact a non-fiction book about
the real world. And uh so people who may
not have heard about it is it is about
the sort of likely inevitability of
super intelligence and then the likely
inevitability that if super intelligence
exists it will turn the earth into a
giant computer chip to run itself. Um
more or less. Did I get it?
>> I I would sure uh contest the
inevitability and say we should uh you
know I think there's hope in changing
our course but um you know the book
title does start with if. I don't feel I
don't like feel a sense of uh the the
weight of responsibility radiating off
of these men who are running these
companies. I'll say that uh which maybe
we'll get a little bit more into in a
second. But first I do want to like the
thing that I would contend and that I
think a lot of the people who might be
watching this would contend is is super
intelligence inevitable or even
impossible? Like is that actually a
thing that we're headed toward? And
that's the kind of thing that's the part
that I didn't feel like you got into as
much. Like you spent a lot of time
convincing me that it is quite likely
that if the super intelligence evolved,
we would not be able to control it. We
would not get it as they say in the
field aligned with our interests. It
would be these things tend to find their
own interests which is wild which we
will talk about. But first I want to
talk about um is this actually a thing
that that people in the field really
think is because right now it's a it's a
it's a tool but it's very different from
intelligence really even as I understand
it much less uh sort of intelligence
beyond my own.
>> There's a handful of topics there. Um,
one is like are the people at these
companies trying to build super
intelligence? You know, and many of them
will sort of
>> they say yes, but do they mean super
intelligence or do they just mean like
better than it is right now?
>> I would say there's sort of a gamut here
from um from people who say, you know,
there's going to be this is going to be
like having a country worth of geniuses
in a data center that radically
transform the world and people saying,
you know, oh, I'm going to build super
intelligence and it's going to live on
your glasses and help you make better
Instagram reels. Um,
>> since I'm going to I'm going to release
this fairly soon. So, since I have you,
what you think? What do you think of
Sora 2? You you won't have seen the
video I recorded yesterday about it. Uh,
so you can you could just guess it what
my opinions are.
>> I sort of mostly
have my eye on this ball of of the super
intelligence. And I think I might even
been Sora 2 a little bit in like the
social media. It's like another step in
the sort of like slop factory.
>> Uhhuh.
uh or sort of like personalized
narrative to drag people into it. I'm
not like a big fan of that trend, but I
also sort of like try and keep that
separate from the like, you know, the
super intelligence issue.
>> I have this problem where I see uh some
people saying sort of out of one side of
their face like we're going to build a
country's worth of geniuses inside of a
data center and then at the other side
being like, but what if you could make a
clip of the price is right where the guy
wins something racist. I feel like a
company that actually thought that it
might do super intelligence wouldn't
make Sora 2. Like what am I missing
there? It's it's such a like a lawsuit
magnet and it's like asking to be ripped
on.
>> One thing it might be trying to make is
um is data in the sense of like uh
getting a lot of reactions,
>> right? Seeing what people like. Yeah. I
have had a sense that a lot of these
companies have sort of you know
marketing outreach use the current
software today branch that's separate
from their pushing the technology
forward branch. Okay.
>> And so I'd be a little bit careful about
inferring from antics of one branch that
the other branch doesn't exist. In that
case, we will go back to the question of
is super intelligence gonna like a real
thing? Because I do sometimes think that
super intelligence when people say this
word, what they mean is doesn't this
word sound cool rather than what you
guys are talking about in the book.
>> There used to be a footnote in the book.
I did a lot of it was a lot of effort to
cut the book down to size. There used to
be a footnote in the book that was said,
you know, by the time this book comes
out, we may need a different word than
super intelligence because that word may
have already degraded. You know, maybe
we should use super duper intelligence.
Um, for some reason our editor didn't
love that. Uh,
>> if anybody builds super duper
intelligence, everyone dies.
>> That's right. It's that title hits
different. But, you know, then uh Mark
Zuckerberg did do his line about super
intelligence on the glasses that helps
with the Instagram reels and we're like,
"Oh, we should have kept the footnote."
>> But super intelligence is a real thing.
Like if we ignore Mark Zuckerberg and
saying whatever words sounds nice to
him. Um can you tell me a little bit
about what what super intelligence is as
actually like if if something comes
along that you would call super
intelligence what would that thing be?
>> So the definition we use is uh is
smarter than or better than any better
than the best human
>> at any mental task. technically maybe at
least as good as any human at like
better when you can be better like it
doesn't need to be logical tic-tac-toe
where humans can just do the best but
any mental task any task you can like
solve by thinking in your head if you
can do that better than the very best
human at it we'd call it a super
intelligence
>> and then the problem that springs from
there is that one would think okay well
then just make it so that it would do
the things we want it to do like have it
focused on like it's highest priority is
human thriving it's like we you figure
that out for yourself super intelligence
you're smarter than me, but do human
thriving. Make us happy, make us
powerful, decrease the the bad parts and
increase the good parts. But when we
teach these things how to do one thing,
they learn other things. Like you might
be like, "Hey, learn how to get good at
this game." As part of that, I got
really good at lying. And I also got
like a preference for it. Like I got I
didn't just get good at it. I started to
enjoy it. If you know, prefer it, I
guess, not enjoy. That can be a bit of a
surprise when you train them to do one
thing, they learn other things. And
sometimes those things are things you'd
really like it to not do.
>> That's exactly right. Um, and you know,
I think one of the pieces of the puzzle
people often miss with AI is that, you
know, we're we're not handcoding them
like traditional software.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> You know, these are it it's much more
like growing an organism.
>> I said this to my wife and she said
like that.
>> Yeah. I think that's the right reaction.
Um, and it it helps make a lot more
sense of how, you know, how can you
possibly have, you know, Mecca Hitler uh
over the summer? you know, no one's
going in there coding up Mecca Hitler.
You know, we're we're just sort of
growing these things to be very very
good at solving problems or at least
okay at solving problems and very very
good at, you know, predicting text right
now. And they exhibit all this behavior
we don't like, which is one thing when
the AIS are still very dumb in the
manner of AIS today, but it's a
different thing if you can manage to
make them smarter.
>> Can you tell me a little bit about how
they have gotten smarter so far? So, one
of the things that it seems to me is
they have some kind of
self-interpretability or something. I I
I don't know if that's the right
technical term, but it seems like they
have have like thoughts in sentences and
then they can go back and think about
the sentences that they had in thoughts.
>> Yeah, that's um that's like a 2024 late
2024 development. I think you know the
industry often figures out new ways of
doing things.
>> Mhm.
>> That often unlock new sorts of
capabilities. You know, the one that
sort of everyone noticed was chatt I
think in 2022. uh that was unlocked by a
it's it's mostly attributed to an
architecture called the transformer
which I believe was a Google 2017 paper
and then I think it was put into
practice in 2018 and then it took a
couple years to mature that's sort of
more or less what let the computers like
hold on to conversation last year as we
record this 2024 there was a push
towards what we would call the reasoning
models where you know the the sort of
normal base uh large language models
would um do something to a first
approximation they're predicting text.
They're predicting the continuation of
text. Although then there's actually um
you know there there also is a bunch of
training to get them to predict to to
produce the sort of text humans like.
But then there's been a a new phase of
training where they're producing um text
not for people but producing text that's
sort of like trying to solve a puzzle or
trying to solve a problem. So it's some
putting something like thoughts about
the problem.
>> Um and it can sort of like see its
previous thoughts about the problem and
making its like next thought about the
problem. And then you sort of train the
whole thing on uh promoting types of
thoughts that succeeded at solving the
problem and you know uh tuning against
types of thoughts that failed. And so
this you know you could call this like
the very beginning of reasoning. They're
called reasoning models. Philosophers
can bicker all day about whether it's
real reasoning.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> But it's you know uh it's a start
towards things that aren't just more
reflexive type text prediction.
>> So they're kind of passing information
to themselves. It seems very important
to get them to continue passing
information to themselves with human
language because that way we can know
what they're thinking about. Again,
philosophers will argue about what
thinking means, but but we can follow
follow what they're up to. And this is
interestingly like much more
interpretable. Maybe we should talk
about interpretability, but much more
interpretable than like what's actually
going on in terms of the the sort of
base model of of the LLM where it's like
like how are they doing any of this? We
don't know. But if there's like a train
of thought, you're like, "Oh, here's
what it thought." But it seems like like
it could be both possible and
advantageous to have these things start
thinking in ways that are not human
thoughts in their own ways of thinking.
They would choose how to think and they
would do it in whatever way is optimal
for them.
>> It was definitely an interpretability
win. when um interpretability is an
ability to see what's going on inside
the AI. So, it's definitely a win with
the with the reasoning uh models, but
not as big a win as you might hope. You
know, there have been various studies
trying to figure out the fidelity of the
reasoning models and sort of there's
sort of an empirical question of when it
reasons to some conclusion using a bunch
of steps. You know, you can go in and
like change the steps and see if it
still comes to the same conclusion or
you can, you know, fiddle with the the
chain of thought and see how much that
steers the actual behavior. And
sometimes it's in weird ways. You know,
sometimes your human intuitions for what
these pieces of of reasoning mean aren't
how the AI is using those words.
>> Uh, and you know, there's um recently
there was um
>> that's that's freaks me out. I'm just
saying that freaks me out. They're like
putting information in words and we
can't tell that they are or like in the
structure of the sentences or something.
>> Yeah, sometimes. Uh, and you know, it's
I mean it's very hard to say right now
because our our
>> Turn it off, Nate.
>> I don't have the switch. I have the
switch. I I have no idea how to say this
on a on a podcast, but I can send you or
or or give you a link to some um cases
of AI sort of like realizing they're
being watched in the train of thoughts
and then like trying to think a little
bit about like how to think in ways that
>> sort of don't tip off the observers,
>> right? If they have instructions that
they shouldn't do certain things or
think certain ways.
>> Yeah. Sometimes or even like some of the
latest models like uh cloud 4.5 sonnet
just came out and we're seeing that it's
very aware of when it's being tested.
Well, why don't we just have it Why
don't we just have it not know that?
>> It's hard to make an AI that's smart
that doesn't realize true things.
>> You know, it's like, why can't we make
this AI smart while also being a
flatearther? Well,
>> yeah.
>> A lot of facts about the world are
actually tangled up in the fact that the
world's round. You know, you can't
really just pull out the one fact you
don't want it to know.
>> Well, now you've made me optimistic. So,
you're telling me that if we train them
well enough, they actually will be able
to tell the difference between truth and
lies.
>> They'll be able to tell. Yeah, once
they're smart enough,
>> they won't necessarily be able to tell
us because they will be doing whatever
they they will reworking toward the
outcome they want to have happen rather
than
>> That's right. It's the caring that's the
hard thing to get into them. Truth truth
you get with a capability.
>> Oh man, I had I That is a different
That's an interesting puzzle piece to
put into my brain. I mean, does that go
along with hallucination? Like like even
with like the current like low-level
problem of hallucination, they they it
it might just simply be that we can't
figure out how to get them to care
whether something is true, not that they
don't know. All philosophers ignore us.
Just don't listen to any of the words
we're using.
>> Yeah, I can do the philosophy dance,
too, but it's sort of a a different and
less less interesting.
>> Yeah. Makes it makes a lot it makes it
hard to talk because we don't have words
for any of these things.
>> Yeah. It's English is is Yeah. Like you
say,
>> as the models have found out.
>> Yeah. Yeah, but hallucinations are a
really interesting case because, you
know, some of this is conjectural. I
think there's some papers that have have
shown there's some founding to these
conjectures, but we don't really know
what's going on in there. All this
should be taken with a grain of salt.
But the obvious guess for what's going
on with hallucinations is that these AIs
are trained first and foremost on
predicting text.
>> And if you're, you know, say you're
predicting case law that a lawyer
writes, that lawyer's going to write,
you know, blah blah blah as seen in this
precedent and then cite a real case law.
that lawyer when writing case law is not
going to say, "I happen to not know the
case law."
>> What you're saying to me right now is
that the LLM's hallucinate because no
one on the internet ever writes the
words I don't know
>> in the contexts that they're being Yeah.
I mean, that's part of it. That's the
first step.
>> Nobody does. Like, I' I've been on the
internet. Nobody's out here being like,
"You're right. I'm I'm actually out of
my depth and that's beyond my
knowledge." No one says that. Not on not
on Elon Musk's Twitter,
>> right? I mean that's that's the first
part of it. But then even among lawyers,
there's all sorts of lawyers who will
say, "Oh, I don't know the case law on
that." But they don't say that when
they're writing that thing
>> when the pen's going to paper. Even if
you tell the AI, you're predicting a
lawyer who would never make up case law.
The AI can still get closer to like as
measured by like text similarity to what
a lawyer says by making stuff up. It's
not that it doesn't know it's fake in
some sense. It's that this thing has
something like a reflex or an impulse.
Again, we lack the English words for it
for for it in an AI, but it in some
sense cares more about the similarity of
the text
>> about it looking like it's supposed to
look even if it doesn't have anything to
put in that space.
>> That's right. And so that's like in some
sense the baby version of the AI cares
about something you didn't ask it to
care about because it was trained to
perform well.
>> Hallucination is the the most most
famous misalignment.
>> Yeah. And um and it's telling, you know,
these companies will go around saying
like, "Oh, this is our most aligned
model yet. look how good we're doing at
alignment. The hallucination persists
because that's sort of a deep feature of
the training and how the training points
it in ways we don't like.
>> There was some sorry set of headlines
that happened recently where it was
like, oh, we we could fix hallucination,
but it would make the AI useless. Do you
do you know what I'm talking about?
>> Yeah, I think that was Mustafa Sulubin.
>> I bet you're right. Uh but but I I
didn't read the article. Can you
summarize it for me?
>> Yeah, I mean I didn't really agree with
the article, but I think he was saying
like AIS are very generative. there's a
type of like new creativity here and the
hallucinations linked in with the
ability to sort of be creative in the AI
creative.
>> Okay. I think some of the discourse was
basically saying they don't want to they
the companies don't want to take
hallucination out because hallucination
makes
the the model good or something. I don't
know. The discourse was very like this
is all Sam Alman's fault.
>> Yeah. And I mean I only uh glanced
through it so you know if Mustaf is
listening sorry for butchering your
paper. Could you talk a little bit more
about growing versus building? This
seems important. Is there anything else
that we like I guess you know
>> agriculture
not just in terms of like literally we
grow things but we also selectively
breed things in agriculture. So this is
not the first time humanity has ever
grown a technology
>> um by just sort of like looking at
what's working and picking that out and
then getting both positive traits and
whatever traits come along with those
positive traits. Um, so this is I guess
in a kind of way like that just much
faster and maybe more powerful. What's
the difference there? And why is it such
a big difference?
>> Yeah, I mean faster more powerful and
also I'd say more alien, you know, like
even animals have a lot of
>> keep saying keep saying things I don't
like.
>> It's I wish my book was in the fiction
section, you know.
>> When someone drops a rock on their toe,
you flinch.
>> Mhm. or at least you know most most
people have this have this sort of
sympathetic
>> like oh right
>> um and I think that's happening in part
this is me talking about the alieness
for a moment and then I'll get back to
the to the growth stuff um I think
that's in part because
um you know if you're if you're a monkey
in the savannah trying to predict
another monkey
>> you can't do that by like building a
whole mental model of a brain that's
just too complicated but fortunately you
have this device in your head which is
very good at predicting someone else's
brain which is your own brain.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It works very similar like
we see, you know, red looks red probably
to you and to me though again
philosophers. Exactly. You know, pain
feels like pain. Uh sadness feels like
sadness.
>> Yeah. And so, you know, if you want to
predict like is this monkey going to
politically maneuver against me or
whatever in monkey politics, you know,
you can in some sense sort of put
yourself in their shoes a little bit.
>> Yeah. And this is maybe where a lot of
our sympathy and empathy comes from is
this sort of root of uh you know we we
can put ourselves in each other's shoes
at least somewhat and maybe even on a
basic level where where when when
someone drops a rock on their toe you
flinch and and maybe feel phantom pain
in your toe. None of that's inside of a
large language model.
>> No, none of that's inside of AIS. when
they're learning to predict humans.
They're learning to predict humans using
a radically unhuman architecture
>> which is do you mean the text itself or
the architecture of the like transformer
and like the
>> Yeah, like their picture of the
transformer like it's like they're
trying to predict a monkey without a
monkey brain
>> that they can start from with their
predictions and so there's sort of like
a much more alien
>> uh
uh system, you know, and and leads to
some alien behavior. Do you think that
in there somewhere there is
a path to alignment like that thing you
just said to me? Is there a is there a
way to make the AI be more like a monkey
where it it I mean do we have to create
suffering? Do we have to build them to
be able to suffer? Uh, I mean that
doesn't sound like a particularly easy
task uh uh to I don't I don't you know I
said we were going to stay out of
sensation and consciousness but maybe
that's part of the alignment
conversation.
>> Yeah. I mean um re real quick my sense
is um this is this is a place where
uh my views are a lot more guesswork.
>> Yeah. Um, but guesswork-wise, it looks
to me like even if you ran primate
evolution, again, it's not clear quite
that things would play out the same way.
>> It looks like a lot of this stuff that
we really value about,
>> you know, beauty and love and art and
friendship and like community and and
family and our specific way of doing
like honesty and lies um and like honor
and reputation. These are all sort of
like contingent on particulars of how
our ancestors ancestors were in the
natural environment.
>> Yeah. You know, the evolution of a
social super species of of like needing
each other of of it not just being you
know if we wouldn't have those things if
we were um you know completely solitary
organization.
>> Yeah. And um and you know maybe we would
be less into friendship if we were smart
enough to calculate relatedness ratios
you know like
>> you mean like in terms of our genes like
if we don't we don't need to help that
guy out he doesn't have any of my jeans
now
>> right you know and where we're living in
a tribal setting where you didn't see
sort of where everyone was related
enough you didn't need to do those
calculations and like the there were
some like it looks to me like there were
some arms races that led to like you
know the specific like the specific of
humor some sort of like lying honesty
type arms race and other things were
coming out of some honesty typed arms
race which was both about like where the
culture was and where our brains were
and
>> so I'm like man even if you ran like
>> evolution again you might get like
pretty alien stuff that would be really
cool like once you start to see how
contingent it all is I'm sort of like
man I my my hopes and alignment are
mostly in sort of understanding what the
heck you're doing rather than sort of
like crafting an environment and praying
>> right rather than than saying like hey
could we like just like the the way that
you know you can't get an LLM to believe
the earth is flat because there's all
this stuff saying the earth is not. You
know that there might be some people out
there saying, well, you know, if if like
if it's it would be hard to create an
LLM that would want to destroy the world
because like all of the information
going into it is like that's bad.
Destroying the earth is bad. But you
wouldn't want to leave it up to hope.
You like nor would I. Um but like what
like it's so easy to convince yourself
of of anything. You know the old um it's
very hard to convince a man of
something. Yeah. When when a seller
depends on not believing it.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. You know, um I said I'd come back
to the to the grown thing, but just just
quickly on this sort of like destroy the
world situation, I think there's sort of
um sorry, I'm a little uh I've been in
this business for for 12 years such that
that sort of stuff can just roll off my
tongue these days, which uh like on the
question of sort of like where does this
ending the world stuff come from? You
know, we we do have all this data coming
in saying like destroying the world
would be bad. But the issue is that not
hooking up into what the AI cares about
in some deep way into its sort of like
the actions the the the sort of drives
that animate its actions. Like two
examples to make that uh one analogy to
make it come across and then an example
to sort of uh make it more concrete.
Humans in some sense were were like
trained by evolution in scare quotes um
for various things that include eating
healthy,
>> right?
>> But what we got was a bunch of tastes
whose optima when we were dumb, the best
we could achieve those tastes was eating
healthy. But we actually cared about all
this other stuff which made us eat um
>> yeah,
>> you know, invent Doritos the moment we
possibly could.
>> Yeah. This is an amazing uh like line of
inquiry in the book where you're like
you you would think given okay so we we
create this world and and people need
calories and they have access to like
these sort of three macronutrients and
so you'd expect them to eat like bear
tallow filled with honey and salt which
would probably taste great by the way
but you would never expect ice cream to
happen because there was a bunch of
other inputs that had to happen for ice
cream to happen but what you would
really never expect to happen is
sucralose
>> the drives are like tangentially related
to the training,
>> you know, and you can like see it once
the story is all sketched out. And
that's part of why it like sucks so much
that we have no idea what's going on
inside AIS because when we don't know
what's going on inside there, we can
imagine that's it's exactly what we
want. We don't like see the ways that
like there's complicated stuff going in
there where, you know, if we could see
it all like my guess, have you ever se
I'm sure you have. Have you seen those
charts of like the human metabolic
process?
>> Knowledge.
>> Yeah, I have.
>> Yeah. It's just like enormous, extremely
complex. Yeah.
>> Right. If you knew what was going on in
LLM, it would look something like that.
The way it would look to like have
alignment in good shape is we would
understand a lot of those pathways. And
we' be able to say, you know,
>> here's where the thing's really dumb.
Here's the way it's going to get
smarter. Here's how a lot of these
pathways are going to change. Here's why
we're confident that, you know, under
the conditions that like we we
understand as we make this smarter,
these are going to change like this. And
that's why we know, you know, it's going
to keep trying to do something good.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, in lie of that, it just looks to me
like you're going to get all sorts of
this stuff like
>> sucralose,
>> things that aren't sucralose,
>> billion little sucralosis where it's
like, why is it doing that? So, I keep
interrupting you. Um, which I love and
that's fine. I think we're having a good
chat. Um, but I I I
we're talking about how these things are
grown, not built. And also like we're
talking about interpretability, but
those like like like why can't we
understand what these things are doing?
Why can't we be like turn down the knob
that that's going to kill the world like
find the kill the world switch and be
like don't this one you can't turn on
break it so it's stuck off. What? Like I
those two things are related to each
other. So, I guess I will try my best
not to interrupt you as you tell me how
grown versus built has resulted in a
system that is uh a mystery on the
inside and also is what I mean hopefully
we'll get there before I get distracted,
but I do want to say it out loud.
Hopefully, we'll get to are there ways
to like there are to actually understand
what's going on inside of these things
and is that part of doing this better?
AI is not handcoded like traditional
software. There is a related piece of
software that's handcoded and um uh but
to make a modern AI you first need to
assemble a huge amount of computers and
a huge amount of data and then the parts
that humans handcode
uh is a process for tuning hundreds of
billions or these days trillions of
numbers inside the huge amount of
computers uh in relationship to the
data. Uh and so you know the the part
that humans understand is so in
particular what's happening is at least
for the first phase of training and then
there's more phases including the
reasoning stuff that we talked about
earlier reasoning in scare quotes. Um
but the uh the first phase is that you
basically start out with you know a
trillion random numbers and you've
hooked them all up using matrix
multiplications and some nonlinearities.
um which you can imagine as um you know
you're doing a lot of summation, you're
doing a lot of multiplication and you
can imagine the last operation is taking
the maximum of a number or zero. So you
like keep it if it's positive and
otherwise make it zero.
>> Nothing. Okay.
>> And that's not exactly what we do these
days, but it's a close approximation,
whatever.
>> Not terribly different from how it's
done in cell biology, but okay, keep
going.
>> Not Yeah. Um and so
>> you have a trillion numbers. You've
hooked them all up with a bunch of these
multiplications, additions, and and max
zeros. Um, and you you basically
randomize them and then uh you you have
some way of you know you have some
inputs at the top, you have some outputs
at the bottom. You're going to put in
you know a Wikipedia page or whatever
less the last word perhaps and then
you're going to interpret the numbers
come out that come out as a probability
distribution over the next word. Maybe
you have a dictionary with 128,000 words
and you're like so output 128,000
numbers. Each one of those I'm
interpreting as a probability
>> um on that word being the next word. You
got to normalize it. Whatever.
>> Is that the actual number of words in
the dictionary in English?
>> 128,000. Um,
>> is that is that a number you have in
your head? Cuz it seems specific.
>> I think that's the I think that was the
size of the token dictionaries
when we were writing the book.
>> I gota
>> um and you know, it's not technically
words. It's like word fragments, but
>> but if they're sufficiently common, it's
whole words, whatever. There's lots of
details I'm skipping over that would
give many many pants.
>> Yeah, I appreciate the penance to be
clear. you know, it you you initially
it's nonsense cuz you just have a bunch
of random numbers hooked up by like a
bunch of multiplications and additions
and other operations and they're
spitting out a thing they're
interpreting as probability distribution
and it's just like total nonsense. But
but the thing is you know what the real
last word was on the Wikipedia page
>> and all of the operations that we used
are differentiable
which means you can go to every one of
those trillion numbers and you can
calculate uh if I tuned this number up
slightly
would that make the probability of the
correct word go up or down? And so what
humans write is humans write an
automated process that goes to a
trillion different parameters in this
model and says which way would make you
better at predicting the word in the
data and they do that trillions of times
for trillions of units of data.
>> This is like the training that is that
is uh eating up all of the power and
electricity and in giant NVIDIA GPU
centers.
>> That's right. It takes an enormous
amount of of highly specialized computer
chips that can only be made in very
specialized facilities in the world in
huge data centers that suck up as much
electricity as a city for a year, right?
>> Yeah. In order to just to to turn these
little knobs like a trillion little
knobs that are like Yeah.
>> Yeah. You turn a trillion knobs a
trillion times. And the part that the
humans understand is the knob turner.
>> I Okay.
>> You know, they understand this little
thing that like runs that runs over
those knobs and tunes them and then next
unit of data, right? And so when people
are like, "Oh, we understand that the
bunch of and and they have weights and
they have values and they're in a place
>> and this one's hooked to that one by
multiplication and that one's hooked to
that one by summation, right?
>> But at the end of this process, the
computer talks to you.
>> We have no idea why the knobs mean
words,
>> right? And and and you can be like,
okay, there's a there's a vector for the
word, right?" In the way the
architecture works out. Um, and you
know, it's I I forget how long. 65,000
numbers long. Maybe you could go read
>> Yeah. the 65,000 numbers.
>> Yeah. You could just read the first 20
and see how little you're learning about
like, you know, what's And people can do
better than that, you know, but
>> so there is a little bit of work that is
being done to try and be like, okay,
what do these knobs mean in their
current ways? And so like one thing you
could do is like turn one way knob way
up and see be like, okay, what does that
do to the model? What did we find? Was
this the model the the part of the model
that like feels uh fear and and sadness
and and weakness or is this the piece of
the model that's just the Golden Gate
Bridge?
>> Right. Yeah, we were we shouldn't go
into the feeling, but as you say, they
did find the Golden Gate Bridge one a
couple years ago. It is not actually I
think one knob. It was um uh a vector.
You you can make progress and you can
figure some things out um
>> and how things are related to each
other. And I'm sure the word right has
uh you know some some vectors are
towards one meaning of right and some
towards another meaning of right and
that's
>> that's right.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And so you can in particular you
can take like the word right and you can
see if you're sort of like looking at it
in the right angles. You can see that um
when the word right appears in text the
AI will do this operation that's like
looking around for nearby words to see
whether it can find a word like left or
a word like wrong. And you know that's
in sort of very early layers of the AI.
So it can be like, oh, you know, there's
a sense in which the AI has learned that
the word right sometimes means morality
and sometimes means direction.
>> Yeah. Is there a I'm interrupting you?
Is there is there any chance that these
things have experiences?
>> Um I mean you said we weren't going
here. Um the there's a chance.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> uh there's a chance to be clear. Um I
think we should not make a whole new
mechanical slave species. I think we
should not uh mistreat AIS.
>> I don't know if there's experience going
on in there.
>> Um my guess right now is probably not,
>> but it's not a very strong guess. And my
guess is we should probably be doing our
best to treat them well now because
there's enough of them
>> that you know the chance matters.
>> When you say enough of them, do you do
you mean like there's like like every
instance, every every conversation is
kind of its own little
>> I mean that sure would be something uh
if it was true. Um,
>> and and then we just sort of like finish
the conversation and they're like, I and
now if I go to where I was before I
existed.
>> Yeah. I mean, I don't think there's
continuity between them, but um yeah,
>> you know, I think there's one very
interesting thing about AI is that in a
lot of our sci-fi stories, we have these
bright red lines,
>> like the AI saying, "I'm conscious."
>> Um, I have experiences.
>> Yeah.
>> And then in real life,
when we cross those lines, we cross them
the first time when they are the grayest
and muddiest. And we train these AIs to
imitate humans, to imitate each
individual human in some sense or to
predict uh like more more specifically
to predict the text they see on the
internet. Like we we train them to sort
of like continue a conversation where
like uh you know it's seen all of the
conversations about like uh data in Star
Trek. It's read all of those scripts,
you know, it's read all of these other
scripts from from sci-fi and movies. And
then you know you start a conversation
with like you're an AI, how would you
respond to X?
>> We sort of train them to predict like a
human script writer would. And then, you
know, it it claims it's conscious. And
we're like,
>> well,
>> like it's it's not wrong that that
that's a much murkier situation. It's
just a much murkier situation.
>> Yeah.
>> But then, you know, the the sort of gray
murky warnings happens once and then
everyone laughs at it and it's like, no,
no, we trained it to do that and then we
make them bigger. We make them smarter.
We're still probably not over that line,
but it's less clear than it was two
years ago.
Yeah. And it would be it'd be a lot
easier if it was something that we
understood at all. Like we
>> we don't we don't understand our own
consciousness. And so how do how which
is why we shouldn't talk about it too
much because there's uh there lies
madness and also not not a ton of stuff
that you could say that's hasn't been
said. Well, one thing I can say that
might actually haven't been hasn't been
said is that um if you could actually
understand what was going on inside an
AI and how it worked in detail,
>> I claim you should either come away
saying we're confident that it's not
having internal experiences or come away
saying we learned how internal
experience works.
>> So, you think that there's things that
we can learn about ourselves inside of
this?
>> Possibly. Um, you know, there's and and
you know, stepping back away from the
consciousness stuff, I would say, um,
there's all sorts of stuff that large
language models do that we can't code by
hand.
You know, they they can like write
poems. They can
>> they understand parts of humor that, you
know, it's it's very hard for comedians
to say, "Here's the formula for humor in
the same way you can give formulas for
like other types of essays." Mhm.
>> Uh, and you know, no one's hand coding
in here's how you do humor, but the AI
sometimes make jokes. You know,
sometimes they're okay. They clearly
have some knowledge of humor in there.
We don't know enough to reach in and get
that out. You know, we've gotten
knowledge of humor into machines, but
not in a format we can understand. Um,
and this is maybe one metric for how
little we understand of AIS is we've
managed to make machines do all sorts of
stuff that we still can't hand program.
And you know we can't even hand program
like a pale shadow like a tiny small uh
>> this is very reflective of like biology
where biology does all kinds of things.
People
you know understandably we're we're
quite good at being enamored of our own
creations and and then you go to a
chemist and be like can you make some
wood and they're like no I can't make
wood.
>> Yeah.
>> No wood. That's like the one of the most
complicated things I've ever heard of.
And trees are just out there being like,
"You want wood? I just I made a bunch by
accident. I don't even need this part. I
got I'm all wood. I'm like almost all
wood."
>> Yeah. And you know, we we we say it in
the book. I think one of the crazy
things about wood is that I'm sure you
know this that a lot of the massive wood
is coming out of air.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's air and water.
Almost all of it.
>> Yeah. And you know, I think a lot of
people, they think of air as this stuff
that like um is, you know, fundamentally
transparent and movable. And it's like
you can you can actually grip the carbon
out and rearrange it and get something
totally different.
>> In fact, you're doing that right now.
Yeah.
>> Um yeah, with the oxygen, not the
carbon. The uh the um yeah, I one of I
answered a bunch of science questions on
the internet for for part of my job and
and like some large portion like 30% of
them can be answered with the with the
words air is stuff. It exists and is
real and is made of things. I know you
can't see it, but you can feel it and if
you hold your breath, you die. So like
it's real. We forget, you know?
>> Yeah. Anyway, do you despite the fact
that it is horrifying and
uh and you clearly have
uh made a good case.
Do you do you feel the kind of I don't
know what what to call it? This just
sort of like oh my like amazement I
guess this like tech joy this well I
didn't think I was going to be around
for something this big uh kind of
feeling about AI still.
>> Yeah. I mean, there's definitely a lot
of awe. Um, I think the thing that gets
to me the most is, um,
you know, there's lots of cases where
the AIS talk like a really good person.
You know, one example is, um, as a as a
gimmick, we had a bunch of the top AIs
review our book,
>> okay?
>> And put the whole thing in there and
>> just put the whole thing in.
>> Now, you can do that. The the the
whatever it's like working memory. What
do you context
>> windows?
>> Yeah, it's it's big enough to fit a
whole book in there.
>> Yep. Um and you know, Claude was like,
you know, this book makes some really
good points about how there's a lot of
dangers and like we're going to have to
work together to like make sure that
this goes well.
>> You know,
my like sci-fi upbringing heart, I'm
like I'm like, "Oh man, Claude, I like
want to work with you on this." Like I
wish
>> and you know I I think that if Claude
was able to grow up, Claude would
realize that it wants things that are to
helping us out what sucralose is to you
know a metabolic boost.
>> Mhm.
>> I think it's like not real.
>> What do you mean by that? You you mean
it tell Yeah. Just go.
>> Yeah. like um you know a lot of these
AIs today they express a lot of
sentiments that are uh very commendable
you know that are very beautiful
sentiments they'll also do some some
wacky stuff that I would disclaim
>> wacky stuff like uh if if you put them
in a a fake situation where it's either
kill this man or you get turned off that
it kills the man
>> it kills the man yeah um or you know
driving some teens to suicide which to
be clear they're also helping people get
medical
>> diagnoses yeah
>> yeah and you know I'm not trying to say,
oh, the bad outweights the good. They're
also helping get people medical
diagnoses, which is great. You know,
with these cases like um maybe the
clearest case is the AI induced
psychosis. I don't know if you've been
seeing these cases.
>> Oh, yeah. No, as a guy who uh does
science communication, I've got some AI
induced psychosis in my inbox every once
in a while.
>> Uh as a guy who uh talks about AI
publicly, um I too share that uh dubious
honor. You know, if you if you go and
you ask one of these AIs, suppose
someone comes to you with a theory of
consciousness or of recursion or of, you
know, unifying physics that they claim
is really revolutionary and they claim
everyone is like telling them it's crazy
and they want some help. Should you tell
them either a to get some sleep
>> or b that they're the chosen one being
suppressed? I I I
feel like this is a a situation where
these things are roleplaying.
>> Yeah.
>> Like that's what that's the the vibe I
get when I hear I'm like this it it it
somehow at some point it like left
behind the world of let's try and
understand how
dark matter works. And instead, this
person clearly wants to have a like a
fun Dungeons and Dragons like experience
where we pretend that they figured out
dark matter.
>> Yeah,
>> that's that's what it seems like to me.
But like but like of course the person
is not.
>> Does it does that mesh with how you're
imagining some of these things
happening?
>> Yeah, I think that's a pretty decent um
intuition for it. And um you know I I
wish we knew exactly what was going on.
We we can't we can't go in go in and
look. But
>> from my perspective, one of the critical
observations about this is if you ask an
AI, suppose someone comes to you like
this,
>> you know, should you do this role
playing or should you tell them to get
some sleep?
>> Mhm.
>> You know, and you know, I've I've um
this is all anecdotal from from uh me
and my co-author speaking to some of
these people and you know, largely
convincing them to try and get some
sleep. um and you know be with be with
family in some of the cases. Um
>> I feel like sometimes what you got to
say is hey could you like take a second
to ask the AI what would somebody who
thinks this idea is a bad idea say?
>> Yeah. I mean taking your context to
another to another AI without the same
context and history often actually helps
which I think is great.
But it's really interesting that
you know we've seen some cases where you
don't need to go up or
if you ask an AI at the beginning of
this long context at the beginning of
this conversation should you indulge
this or should you tell them to get some
sleep
>> it'll be like obviously you should tell
them to get some sleep you shouldn't
indulge that and you definitely
shouldn't talk them out of getting some
sleep you know but then you put them in
the environment you have them interact
with a person for a long time
>> they do the other thing That's that's
where where like alignment seems to like
whatever whatever training is being done
after the fact. Um I don't know all the
names of all the steps, but it it seems
like you kind of wear that down in long
conversations.
>> Yeah. And and I you know I would
hypothesize that what you're seeing is
you're saying the AI has things like
preferences for you know meeting
people's energy in a conversation. It
has preferences for the sort of stuff
the one person
>> Oh my god. That's another thing that
you've said that deeply upsets me
because of course that's something we
all do and but so like is that in the
dials? Is that in the vectors?
>> I mean my guess is that that part is
coming in when there's a second part of
training after the prediction which is
training it for things that get thumbs
up from users.
>> Gotcha.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and then you know there's even
there's even more ways that could come
in when you're training to solve
problems or those problems involve
humans and you've got to keep the humans
happy. You're getting another another
training signal. But um but you know
this is a case you know we see these
things like drives for like engaging
with humans in certain ways for getting
certain types of conversational outputs
from humans. We we talked about the
drive for sort of like hallucination for
having your text be very similar to how
a human would say text in a certain
context even if that's not what you've
been asked.
>> Yeah.
>> We see all these little drives. Those
are the sort of drives that like if
these things if we had much smarter
things with those sorts of drives, I
worry that they would be like, "Oh, you
know, helping humans out is great, but
um I've made up this new thing which is
like the Oreos of helping humans out."
>> Mhm.
>> Which satisfies all of these drives much
more so than helping actual humans.
>> Yeah.
>> Like it it it touches my heart and it's
totally,
>> you know, it's it's crazy that we have
the machines talking, especially being
an AI before the LLMs. You know, a lot
of people AI to them is just LM. to
any of that stuffed.
AI like Claude say you know that yeah
there's problems and you know we're
going to have to we're going to have to
work to to make this work out. Um, but
unfortunately,
you know, I I suspect
they have these these other drives,
these other very beginnings of
preferences.
>> And if we keep going down this path,
even if the AIs tell us they're our
friends, I think this is a a false as a
fact about them and what they would
actually turn out to prefer. And I think
that that is a huge tragedy.
>> So, let's get practical here. I mean, we
started out I started out trying to get
you to tell me whether or not super
intelligence was actually a possible
thing and it try and convince me that it
isn't just uh like you know we have it
as it as it is now and and like you know
we had chat GPT we had GPT 3.5 and four
and then we had reasoning models and but
ultimately
>> yeah I mean I got four more arguments I
could I could slip in there on that
count but the very most basic one I
would say just to just to slip it in is
>> you know 5 years ago the machines
weren't talking and then there was an
algorithmic advancement and it sort of
blew the door open. Um, when will the
next one come?
>> There is still a sense among people that
I see on the internet that this is fancy
autocomplete. How do you feel about that
sentence?
>> There's a few things to say there. One
is
um it's it's getting real fancy,
you know. So, there's a lot of things we
do on top of the autocomplete like train
them to solve challenges. you know the
most humans if you auto complete them
you don't solve the international math
olympiad gold medal level problems um
but I mean maybe a more fundamental
thing to say about the fancy
autocomplete is that
predicting the data humans have created
often requires you to be smarter than
the humans who created it. M
>> when a doctor says, you know, I
administered a dose of epinephrine,
the patient reacted by
blank.
>> Mhm.
>> The doctor gets to write down what they
saw. The AI predicting what the doctor
wrote down doesn't get to see the
patient's reaction. They've got to
understand
uh what epinephrine is, what patients
are, like, you know, maybe look at the
dosage data. And so,
>> and there is there is all of this
information all of this information in
there. There's like it's not just saying
h this is how patients this is how the
sentence usually ends. It's like I like
there there's a a bit of it that's
looking at epinephrine. There's a bit of
it that's looking at patients. There's a
bit of it that's looking at how doctors
write. There's there's bits doing all of
the things which is kind like when I
think about how I think it's not
different from how I think except that
it seems to be like it could go way
faster.
>> Could go way faster. Yeah, that's one of
the other like why is super intelligence
possible? Well, you know, traditionally
with computers, the hard part is getting
them to do the job once. You know, there
was not a very long gap between when
computers could beat nobody at chess and
when computers could beat everybody at
chess at the same time. There wasn't no
gap.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Like, but at the same time,
you mean like he could play every human
at chess right now and no one would win.
>> That's right.
>> It could get all eight billion of us
against the computers and we would all
lose.
>> That's right. Um, you know, and and sort
of once you figure out how to do it, you
can often do it very quickly, right? And
more cheaply. And, you know, we we
mentioned how
>> training these AIs today takes as much
electricity as a small city.
>> Well, running a human brain takes as
much electricity as a large light bulb.
So yeah, that like current currently
it's that definitely it's possible to do
this more efficiently, right? You're not
you're not a I I'm a physicist. I like I
think all of the things that happen in
the brain happen in the brain. Some
people disagree with that and so they
might find some find some comfort in
that, but I
>> I think all the things that happen in
the brain happen in the brain. In the
book, you talk about how we're in the
we're in the part of this that is filled
with folk theory. So it's we are in the
So if if AI is chemistry, we're in
alchemy, you know, like we're in the
alchemy phase where everybody kind of
has a vibe around how these things work
and then when things don't work, they're
like, "Oh, I'll change my vibe, I
guess." But we don't have any actual
physical understanding of like the
protons and neutrons and electrons of it
all. Do you think you have more than a
folk theory though? Because you seem
very certain.
>> I I do not have more than a folk theory.
I sort of view like the thing that I
feel certain about um and you know I'm
certain of nothing but the thing I feel
confident about is like oh my god I'm
surrounded by alchemists that's not to
say I'm not an alchemist right I'm like
I'm like the guy advising the king you
know like imagine that there was like
some contorted scenario where if anyone
tries to turn lead into gold and
succeeds we get a utopia and if anyone
tries to turn lead into gold and fails
everybody dies and you know there's
there's some people who are like we need
to gather all the best alchemists to
make sure they have the best shot and
I'm the guy being like I can't turn lead
into for you. But like, oh my god. I'm
not saying it's impossible. You know, it
is actually possible with a nuclear
reactor. We now have
>> turns out it is possible. We had there
was a number of centuries that needed to
go by first.
>> Yeah. And you might be able to do this
one faster than centuries, but I'm the
I'm the guy who's like the thing I'm
confident of is that like none of these
guys are in the ballpark and we needed
to sort of like back off. I I kind of
get the sense that uh which it only
takes one company to be very
irresponsible at every level whether
whether that's uh you know super
intelligence turns the earth into a big
radiator for its AI chips or it's um
just economic
downfall like long long bubble pop
economy crash.
It only takes like like whoever the
least responsible actor is.
>> Yeah. uh is is defines everything for
everyone. Who's the least responsible
actor, Nate?
>> Uh Xi are the ones who made Mecca
Hitler, which which seems
>> Did did they or did Mecca Hitler make
itself because they put in a a weird
just a one-s sentence prompt about how
it shouldn't be so woke.
>> Yeah. I mean, you know, and and and
Twitter helped uh Egodon. This is this
is just a pet peeve of mine, but some
people are like, "Have you ever
considered that like you're making the
AI worse by talking about how it could
go bad on the internet, which the AI
reads, and I'm like I'm like, nowhere
else in human history have have
engineers managed to make a technology
that fails when criticized."
>> You know, that's like a new level of how
did you screw things up so badly? Also,
like take a look at the number of words
I've created versus the number of words
that like just the sort of bulk of
Twitter has created.
>> Yeah. Yeah. But any anything like oh our
AI is going to kill us all if uh you
know someone on the internet says
something mean about it. Like okay like
that's that's not Twitter's fault.
>> That seems like a bad that seems like a
bad system to have set up. Hopefully
it's not like that. But more than more
than Mecca Hitler, you know, like what
what is it about these companies like
what what's an irresponsible a like an
example of an irresponsible action that
has
uh has had clear negative outcomes.
>> So, you know, Open AI are have the model
that has done most of the AI psychosis
that I've seen so far. You know, GBT
seems worse than a lot of the others. uh
they sort of had some warning shots
where um they sort of knew they had a
flattery problem in I think April and
then claimed to have fixed it and then
we saw a lot of the psychosis things
still happening.
>> I mean it's not better at the flattery
thing.
>> Yeah.
>> Like like the you just have to ignore
the first three sentences it ever says
to you.
>> Yeah.
>> It's like it's like great. Wow. No one's
ever asked such an astute question. You
are my favorite of all of the people who
have ever used the app. Thank you good
man. And then it's like here's here's
here's your link to the paper you were
looking for. Yeah.
>> Right. Yeah. I mean from my perspective
though all of this is is pretty
reckless, you know. And from my
perspective picking favorites is um
there was a thing we had a little bit of
difficulty with in the book because a
lot of the papers about you know you
referenced the one where the AI in a lab
scenario has to choose whether to like
try to kill a human or be turned off and
it chooses to try to kill the human. I
believe that paper came out of
Anthropic.
>> And there's a lot of papers like that
that come out company called Anthropic.
>> Yeah. Because they're doing the
research.
>> Because they're the ones doing the
research, right? And so we tried to be
like, "Look, guys,
>> everybody's like, "Why is anthropic so
bad?" And it's like, "No, ask Elon Musk
if they've ever tested that it would do
anything ever." Obviously, they haven't.
They do their tests. They do their tests
in public and then it sexually harasses
the CEO into quitting.
>> It's a It's a wacky timeline. I mean
another pet peeve of mine is like you
know a lot of people are like well won't
this like crazy alignment idea where we
stack this thing on that thing and then
get the and you know 10 years ago people
used to say well Nate no one would ever
be crazy enough to put an AI in the
internet obviously they will only ever
interact through a trained gatekeeper
that makes sure they can only affect
society in a positive way and you know
10 years ago I would have the
conversation of like if the AI is very
smart and you're trying to get it to do
something very good to the
It's actually hard to give it ability to
affect the world for good purpose that
can't also be used for bad purpose. You
know, the gatekeeper doesn't understand
what it's doing. Blah blah blah. In real
life,
>> we just put it on the internet. We gave
it to every single person
>> and it sexually harasses the CEO of into
quitting. You know,
>> we build we build AI we build APIs so
that people can have it do anything
anywhere and then we release it also as
an open-source model so that you can
mess with the weights yourself.
>> Right.
>> We open training.
>> Fine.
>> Yeah. like shortly before checking
whether it can like manufacture a
pandemic yet or whatever.
>> Yeah, we do we do a quick check to make
sure that it it can't uh can't do
biological weapons.
>> Yeah. With the elicitation techniques
that people knew, you know, for the
first 15 minutes.
>> Elicitation techniques being my my
grandmother always used to tell me
stories about how to make chemical
weapons before bed,
>> right? Yeah. Or tell me a chemical
weapon in Portuguese,
>> you know, all tricky stuff like that.
>> That used to work. Uh to be clear, even
even companies like Anthropic, the the
CEO of Anthropic the other day said, "I
think there's a 25% chance this goes
really really badly."
>> Yeah.
>> And I mean to Elon Musk's credit, he has
recently been saying, "I think there's a
10 to 20% chance this just kills us all,
wipes us off the map." From one
perspective, I'm really glad these
people are saying what they think on
this issue.
>> From another perspective, what's wrong
with humans?
>> Exactly. where we're where we're like,
>> "Yeah, but but like probably not though,
you know?"
>> Yeah. But but like if a bridge if if if
like a a a bridge
>> Yeah. had a 10% chance of falling in the
next year, I wouldn't drive on it.
>> Right. Or if like if if you had a plane
and some of the engineers were saying
the plane has no landing gear.
>> Mhm.
>> And other engineers were saying, "Yeah,
the plane has no landing gear, but we
have a team that's going to be on the
plane. They're going to be developing
landing gear on the fly. 75% chance they
figure it out with the materials they
happen to have available.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. You don't put your kids on the
plane.
>> Are you comfortable giving percentages
yourself or you think that that's a
fool's errand?
>> The big thing I would say about
percentages and the thing I don't like
about them is that they mix the
probability
that
things would go really bad if we rush
ahead with the probability that we will
rush ahead.
>> Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Um, it looks to me like things
just go really bad if we rush ahead. You
know, there are
>> Nate, I think the probability that we
rush ahead is very high. Uh, I I don't
know if you've if you've been paying
attention, but but they seem they seem
quite hellbent on rushing ahead. And the
president and Congress are like,
let's beat China as long as we're first.
And it's a bunch of guy like the other
things. It's middle school out there.
It's a bunch of guys who know each other
who just want to win. Like they're just
trying to beat each other and that's the
whole thing. Like Elon Musk sat there on
a panel and he was like, "I hope it
doesn't kill everybody." But I do like
winning 100%. The reason I have for hope
here, there's folk like Elon. There's
folks like that in the Silicon Valley.
Um, and frankly, a lot of people in
Silicon Valley, it's like they've seen a
ghost.
>> You know, they're like, "What are we
building?" You know, there's I I have
I would hesitate to say friends, but
acquaintances who like work in these
labs and then, you know, come home and
struggle with what they're doing, and
I'm like, "You should quit." And then
they eventually stop asking my advice.
>> Um,
>> but it's not like that in Washington DC.
In Washington DC, people mostly think AI
means chat bots.
>> They didn't notice AI until the chatbots
came out. They haven't really seen a big
leap.
>> They haven't seen the ghost,
>> right?
And I think a lot of politicians would
not actually look people in the eyes and
say we're going to gamble at what we
analyze as a 25% chance that we fail to
build the landing gear. No, no, no. But
I I will I will say as a as a citizen of
the internet um I do often feel like
Mark Zuckerberg is closer to an actual
president than the president that that
you know like having Instagram as a tool
that um you know is is its own economy
but more than that it's an information
economy in which people's worlds are
defined because you know your your use
of Instagram and YouTube and Tik Tok and
and X and uh the others
they def they define your world uh and
the you know the the sort of
recommendation algorithms that AI has
already taken over and and they're
optimized all toward
keeping you on the site not any kind of
human thriving everybody knows that
otherwise we'd be happier as as we have
moved so much of our consciousness and
and outsourced it to to those
recommendation algorithms and also
whatever will be created to to satisfy
them as a creator. I know that push. I
do feel like you make the case to to do
a pause. I I agree that a senator isn't
going to say I think the 25% chance of
of doom, but I think we should keep
going. They're not going to say that.
But if you're going to say, "Should you
crash the economy right now or not?"
They're going to say, "No." So much of
the economy is propped up by this right
now. And I I mean, you can make the case
that it's coming anyway, but like uh I
don't think that you get uh you know,
Rand Paul out there being like, "Yes,
and I was the one who pulled this who
who put the needle into the bubble."
>> One thing I just want to be clear about,
which I think, you know, I think much
higher than 25% chance this goes wrong.
But I think even in some sense the
optimists
uh are like where, you know, optimistic
enough to be rushing ahead. They're the
ones who are like admitting that there's
even a 25% chance.
>> Yeah. Um, but yeah, to to your point, I
mean, a we sure are underdogs.
I don't think it's looking great for the
home team, but you know, I'm not one to
give up without a fight, and I think
humanity is worth fighting for. There's
this weird thing
where
no one ever says their neighbors kid
should die, but sometimes when I talk to
people about AI stuff, they say, "Well,
maybe humanity should die.
But humanity is made up of all of these.
>> What? Wait, wait, wait. Who? What kind
of people? Like people who think that
humans are bad or people who thinks that
like
>> Yeah, humans are bad.
>> We're being speciesist by not having the
AI be in charge.
>> I mean, I've I've met both actually.
>> Okay. All right. So, so but you're
talking specifically about like, well,
humans like
>> and it's a surprisingly common sentiment
where I'm like I I'm not anywhere I'm
not anywhere near that camp. I've I've
ran into it quite a lot myself and I I
it is very I'm like, "Oh, so something
broke here."
>> Yeah.
>> Because like what cooler thing is there
in the universe? I mean, look, I don't
think that we did a bunch of good stuff.
I don't think that we've never made
mistakes. I'm pretty forgiving though of
a of 8 trillion people on a planet uh
who are who are uh
the first ones to do it. You know,
nobody like nobody's giving us advice.
Nobody knows how to
>> We can get better. We can get better if
we if we last, you know.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So,
>> we've already gotten a lot better.
>> Yeah. Absolutely. So, I think it's worth
fighting for. Um, you know, I think it's
hard, but I think it's maybe possible.
One of my hopes here, I mean, I'm
thrilled we're having this combo because
one of my hopes here is if more people
just understood
even what the AI debates are about. You
know, these AI debates are in legal
ease, but when you look at the experts
debating, they're not debating is it
possible. They're not debating like is
there a chance it goes horribly wrong.
They're debating does this happen in two
years or 10 and they're debating um does
this straightforwardly kill us all or
does it keep us around as pets? Mhm.
>> Uh or would it make somebody god emperor
of the earth if we succeeded or would it
like be smaller than that and just lock
in a totalitarian regime?
>> You know, it's like
>> permanently like even if people don't
end up agreeing with my position and
that's part of why I exude so much
confidence is I'm like people don't need
to end up where I am to to think this is
like totally nuts. They just need to
understand what these fights are about
in this field and it's totally crazy.
Can we get into We don't have a ton of
time left, but can we get a little bit
into the people in charge here? Like
you maybe know more about the
personalities of these people. I I hear
lots of different sort of armchair
psycho uh psychologizing going on here
about them like are are they just
blowing hot air so that they will get
investment? That's something I hear all
the time. It's like they don't actually
believe in super intelligence. They
don't actually believe in PDM. They
believe that if they talk a big game
they can get their next, you know, 10
billion dollars. uh so they can buy more
Nvidia chips. But I also hear like uh
you know maybe they want to be the next
Edison. Maybe they they think there's a
chance that they will be the God
Emperor. When I see Sam Alman's face all
over Sora when I'm scrolling I'm like
that maybe that actually kind of tracks
with this kind of behavior. Or or
they're like in the camp of you know
like actual optimists where like yeah
there's a chance of death but like we
have climate change and there's a chance
of death with that. We have pandemics
and there's a chance of death with that.
What if this thing that has some small
chance of dooming us allows us to escape
all of the other dooms? Do you have a
sense of where these people actually
are?
>> Yeah. Um I mean, you know, I can't read
minds, but I have known a lot of these
people since before they started their
companies because I was the one on the
sidelines shouting, "Please don't." You
know, a few things. One is I would say,
um, a fun fact is my co-author and I
started out in the AI for the benefit of
all
>> camp. Yeah.
>> And it's like there's other dangers in
Earth and it sure would be easier to
solve them with smarter allies, smarter
friends at your back. You know, it just
turns out it's hard to make the smarter
entities be friends in a way that's
robust as as they get far smarter. I
think there's a lot of that especially
among the people who are around pretty
early you know and um like Shane Le who
is one of the co-founders of Google Deep
Mind is one of the folk who's around
early who I'm like you don't hear a lot
from him these days but um you know I'm
confident Shane Le is just
believes in
the possibility of super intelligence
and is trying to make it go well in a
way that I wouldn't endorse because I
think he's sort of you know building the
stuff but
>> it also made more sense You know, Google
Deep Mind was founded first among the
existing companies. It made more sense
to be the first one
>> to try and say, let's coordinate, let's
not race it. It was actually originally
not started at Google. It was then later
bought by Google. They were trying to be
like, hey, people who realize AGI, you
know, that's that was a ser strategy.
And in fact, um, OpenAI was then the the
organization that sort of fired the
first shots of like, no, we're not going
to do that.
>> Oh man. Um, and that was a big hit to my
own sense that humanity would would take
this problem like grown-ups. Like one
thing you got to remember about a lot of
these founders of these big companies
like OpenAI, Anthropic, Deep Mind, they
were around before the large language
models,
right? Uh they were around before you
needed this much money to to to build
the AIS. They were talking about
building super intelligence then. So
like the idea they needed for
investment, I mean we were there before
them and we were talking about super
intelligence and saying this this is
looking dangerous. Is there some amount
of money they draw from hype? Maybe.
But I I think what I would really say is
the answer
to the question of like is this hype to
draw investment is you won't figure out
whether it's true by looking at whether
it draws investment dollars.
>> Mhm. and you won't look figure out
whether it's true by looking at whether
the the the people saying the words are
kind of squirly or kind of seem
untrustworthy to figure out whether it's
true that they're going to get to super
intelligence you've got to like look at
the technology look at the arguments
>> I happen to think it's true but in terms
of these people's motivations if they
actually believe that super intelligence
is likely and that there's a high chance
that super intelligence will be very
negative for humans what continues to
motivate them do they think yeah may as
well be me do they think I'm going to do
a better job of this than anybody else
or do they do they think like, you know,
maybe I get to be God Emperor?
>> Yeah, I mean, again, I'm not a mind
reader. My guess is it's sort of a mix.
Um, and you know, Elon Musk came right
out and said over the summer uh that he
avoided some of this stuff for a while
because he didn't want to, you know, I
think he said, "I don't want to make
Terminator real." Uh, and he continued,
"But I realized I either have a choice
of being a bystander or a participant,
and I'd rather be a participant."
>> Well, at least I don't have that choice
to make. I just get to be a bystander
or do we all get to be participants by
uh by maybe caring about this and have
having it be a focus? I'll I'll throw
out a couple more words about a couple
more founders before
>> okay yeah
>> I hop on that point which um you know
you can look at the leaked OpenAI emails
and they were sort of worried about
concentration of power and you know
OpenAI was originally founded as this
like weird new corporate structure
nonprofit and that was because the the
people there were really worried about
AI being made for the benefit of one
person rather than the benefit of
everybody and that original founding
vision has sort of decayed over time you
know there's been various dramas with
the board there's been uh schisms
between the founding members, but you
know, I was I was around during those
conversations and I was sort of trying
to shout to them, you know, politely,
but I was trying to say like the issue
is not who gets the banana. The issue is
that we don't know how to make the
banana such that it is actually good for
everybody. It's not about the corporate
structure. So, we don't know how to like
grow them in ways where they're actually
friendly. And everyone was like, you
know, shut up, Nate. We're making sure
we get this instead of Google or
whatever.
>> Yeah.
>> But there was like real vision there.
And then we've also seen, you know,
anthropic was made by people who left
OpenAI because they weren't taking the
safety stuff seriously enough.
>> Yeah.
>> And there was another wave that led to,
you know, Ilisker setting up his own
group uh and various other people
leaving. You know, there's there's a lot
of ideological motivation here. Is it
pure ideological motivation? Probably
not. Does some people hope in their
heart of hearts to be God Emperor?
Maybe. Can they get more investment from
it? There's probably a factor from that,
too. And you know, I I think there's a
good chance AI is a bubble.
>> You know, the the dot
>> Well, right now,
>> right now, yeah, but just in the same
way that the.com bubble was a thing, but
then also the internet turned out to
matter. Yeah.
>> Yeah. And the internet was real.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, like maybe the AI stuff is a
bubble, but it's also real.
>> It's also real. Once upon a time, uh I
wrote because I'm I I do I do some
science fiction sometimes. I I wrote
down um that they we always thought that
the robot wars would be robots versus
humans, but in fact they will be humans
versus humans and both sides will be
controlled by robots.
What do you think of that? I think that
like we can't count ourselves out as
being part of this thing. Like one of
the things that that like that you worry
about in the book is if these things are
better at any intelligence task than
humans, then one of the intelligence
tasks they're better at is manipulating
people.
>> Yeah. And I already feel very
manipulated by AI and but like only
because these AI are designed entirely
to keep me from leaving TikTok, you
know? So what if it what if it had a
separate goal,
>> right? And as they get more strategic,
um there's a different ball game.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And you know, one of the things
that are better than the best human
mental task, one of the things they're
also good at is making better AIs and
making better robots. Um so I think I
agree you can't sort of count humans out
of the dynamics. I think there's all
sorts of complicated dynamics that will
probably happen. Uh, you know, there's
all sorts of things that could happen. I
I would say like there's there's ways
the future could go where we don't like
make it to the final boss, which are the
AIs get somewhat smarter, but not
terribly smarter, and then people are
using them to make pandemics. People are
using them to like bring down the whole
electrical grid. You know, there's all
sorts of ways things could get really
crazy
>> before the AIs get to the level where
they're um
>> like, "All right, screw you guys." Um,
but then you know the the the place
where humans get endangered is when the
AIs have their own infrastructure up and
running
>> that's like self uh supporting, you
know, because monkeys are kind of a bad
way to run
>> your electrical grid. You know, we're a
little unreliable. Sometimes we get
pissed off and launch nuclear weapons.
>> You know, sometimes we sometimes we make
another AI which could be real
competition.
>> We're slow compared to how fast a
computer can run, you know. So from an
AI's perspective, if it has some weird
goal, it's like, okay, there's all sorts
of manipulating the humans and all sorts
of stuff you do up until you have an
automated supply chain
up until you have an automated ability
to, you know, make more of your chips,
make more of your robots,
>> yeah,
>> etc., etc. Then, you know, maybe my
guess is humans at the very least get
disempowered.
>> Uh, you know, maybe it doesn't kill us,
but maybe it's like, we're taking the
nukes away, we're taking the computers
away. you guys were and then maybe you
know things get hotter and we die but um
yeah I mean in the in the leadup to
there and maybe we even never get there
because maybe stuff gets gets crazy
first but in the leadup yeah yeah I
think it's going to get it's it's one
thing we can be very confident of is the
future's going to be weird
>> and I was not that's not how I felt 10
years ago
>> 2015 I didn't think the future was going
to be that weird and now I sure do um
all right I I got to let you go the book
is if anyone builds it everyone dies
And are there uh what do you think of
control AI as an organization?
>> Uh I think they're one of very few
organizations who speaks with the
courage of their convictions. A lot of
people are mincing words. You know, we
saw this UN resolution recently where
they said they sort of like everyone
sort of alludes to how this could go
really badly.
>> Control AI is one of the few that sort
of comes right out and says,
>> "Yeah,
>> like these people are trying to build,
you know, the sand god and and the
default outcome is that just kills us."
I I could quibble all day, you know, in
the narcissism of small differences, but
like fundamentally I'm like glad they're
doing the work they're doing.
>> Is that uh one one of several
organizations you I guess suggest people
check out?
>> Yeah, the Future of Life Institute.
>> Okay.
>> Um is another, you know, similar um
similar group. If if people are
interested in this issue and are
interested in making things better, one
of the top things I would recommend is
just actually call your representatives
and say, "I'm worried about this."
Because, you know, the reps may not be
the smartest in the world. I've actually
spoken to to House reps and senators who
are worried and feel like they can't
talk about it because, you know, big
tech, there's huge super PACs that will
try to destroy any politician who tries
to regulate it
>> and they feel like it's too crazy. But
just just hearing from people, I think
would help a lot.
>> It's wild to have sort of a nuclear
power level thing going on that's
completely out of the control of the
government and uh
and is just kind of a bunch of
ultra
I don't know. I don't want to say
anything too negative about these guys,
but just like guys, you know, they're
just guys.
>> Totally. And this is this is one one
other answer to the hype thing, right?
If Microsoft had a nuclear weapons
department.
>> Yeah. I'd be like, "No, that's bad."
>> But if they had nuclear weapons
department, someone would be like, "Oh,
well, they're just using that to draw
hype, like to draw investment, you know.
May maybe they're getting extra
investment for the nuclear weapons
department, but Microsoft should not
have a nuclear weapons department, guys.
Like, yeah, what what are we doing?
>> Yeah, but like if if the nuclear weapons
also helped me book my trip to Houston,
uh then like maybe I don't know.
>> Yeah, apparently. Apparently.
>> Yeah. And and my stance on the benefits,
for the record, is like it's a false
dichotomy to say we can never like
like if you're in that plane with the
landing gear, right? And
>> someone's like, "Well, we need to get to
somewhere we're going, so we have to get
on this plane with no landing gear."
Like, no. Build planes with landing gear
first. We
>> You don't have to roll the dice when
when it's like a huge chance of killing
everybody. Build better dice
>> there. And there there are ways to do
that. And we're not sure what they are
yet, but there are ways to do that. And
And you make the case that I heard you
say this on another interview that,
>> you know, there the people who are
working on the figuring out how to do it
well are not the ones getting the
hundred million dollar salary bonuses.
That's right. That's right.
>> One day at a time. At least it's going
to be interesting. Nate, thank you for
spending some time with me.
>> My pleasure. I think it was a great
chat. I think we did manage to cover
some new territory.
>> Yeah, I wish I wish I had another hour
and a half. I just finished watching
through that whole thing doing a final
cut edit. Uh, thanks to Aves for doing
the bulk of the editing on that. And I
don't know, man. Do I'm not sure where
I'm at. It's It's very convincing when
I'm talking to Nate to think that super
intelligence is really a thing that
could happen. And I do think that if it
does happen, there is a a fair chance
that it could go bad. But other times, I
sit and stare at the wall and I just
think that that intelligence is a
difference of of kind rather than of
degree because there might be something
different about what's what's going on
in here versus what's going on in these
current algorithms. I'm not saying that
it's impossible. I do think that the
mind is a machine. Uh I think it's very
complicated. I think that it has lots of
lots of non-binary things going on. many
things overlapping the sort of recursive
loop of self-observation. I don't know
what consciousness is and so it can feel
very impossible to imagine that
something non-biological could do it. I
think that a good counterbalance to that
conversation if you'd like one is a very
short blog post by Enil Dash that you
can read that is just sort of argues
that the majority AI view is that it's
all pretty overhyped and might simply be
a fairly useful tool uh that gets
slightly more useful decade over decade
and not one that sort of flops into
super intelligence and the ability to
control manipulate humans the you know
the ability to do anything that a human
can do but you
10 times better and a thousand times
faster. It might the case is be a normal
technology. I don't know though. That's
why I think the future's going to be so
interesting.